ARROW-16773: [Docs][Format] Document Run-Length encoding in Arrow columnar format (#13333)
apache/arrow: docs/source/format/Columnar.rst

We discuss dictionary encoding as it relates to serialization further
below.

.. _run-length-encoded-layout:

> Run-Length-encoded Layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run-Length Encoded Layout
```

-------------------------

Run-Length is a data representation that represents data as sequences of the
same value, called runs. Each run is represented as a value, and an integer
describing how often this value is repeated.

> Any array can be run-length-encoded. A run-length encoded array has a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any array can be run-length encoded. A run-length encoded array has a single
```

> buffer holding as many signed 32-bit integers, as there are runs. The actual

Author: This is actually not true if we use 32 bits. An array whose length is larger than a 32 bit integer cannot be represented

> buffer holding as many signed 32-bit integers, as there are runs. The actual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buffer holding a signed 32-bit integer for each run. The actual
```

We discuss dictionary encoding as it relates to serialization further
below.

.. _run-length-encoded-layout:

Run-Length Encoded Layout
-------------------------

Run-Length is a data representation that represents data as sequences of the
same value, called runs. Each run is represented as a value, and an integer
describing how often this value is repeated.

Any array can be run-length encoded. A run-length encoded array has no buffers

> by itself, but has two child arrays. The first one holds a signed 32-bit integer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
by itself, but has two child arrays. The first one holds a signed 32-bit integer called a "run end"
```

for each run. The actual values of each run are held the second child array.

The values in the first child array represent the length of each run. They do
not hold the length of the respective run directly, but the accumulated length
of all runs from the first to the current one, i.e. the logical index where the
current run ends. This allows relatively efficient random access from a logical
index using binary search. The length of an individual run can be determined by
subtracting two adjacent values.

> A run has to have a length of at least 1. This means the values in the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A run must have have a length of at least 1. This means the values in the
```

run ends array all positive and in strictly ascending order. A run end cannot be

> null.

Reviewer 2: I recommend adding something to this section saying "RLE Arrays must not have have a validity bitmap" which would also imply a run end could not be null. As worded I think it is unclear if a validity bitmap is allowed but must be all `valid` or if the bitmap is not allowed

Reviewer 2: " A run end cannot be null." sounds good to me

As an example, you could have the following data: ::

    type: Float32
    [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, null, null, 2.0]

In Run-length-encoded form, this could appear as:

::

    * Length: 7, Null count: 2
    * Children arrays:

      * run ends (Int32):
        * Length: 3, Null count: 0

>         * Validity bitmap buffer: Not required

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * Validity bitmap buffer: Not present (not allowed)
```
See comment above

Reviewer 2: I still think it would be best to be explicit here that no validity bitmap is allowed to avoid ambiguity

same value, called runs. Each run is represented as a value, and an integer
describing how often this value is repeated.

Any array can be run-length encoded. A run-length encoded array has no buffers
by itself, but has two child arrays. The first one holds a signed integer
called a "run end" for each run. The run ends array can hold either 16, 32, or
64-bit integers. The actual values of each run are held
the second child array.

The values in the first child array represent the length of each run. They do
not hold the length of the respective run directly, but the accumulated length
of all runs from the first to the current one, i.e. the logical index where the
current run ends. This allows relatively efficient random access from a logical
index using binary search. The length of an individual run can be determined by
subtracting two adjacent values.

A run must have have a length of at least 1. This means the values in the
run ends array all positive and in strictly ascending order. A run end cannot be
null.

As an example, you could have the following data: ::

    type: Float32
    [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, null, null, 2.0]

In Run-length-encoded form, this could appear as:

::

>     * Length: 7, Null count: 2

Reviewer 3: This formulation of null count is a little surprising, it implies that when computing the parent ArrayData from a set of children, it must iterate the null mask in conjunction with the run ends. This is also inconsistent with how null counts work for other nested types

Author: You're right, it should actually say 0, since the array has no validity bitmap

(I tried to reply via the reply button in the ml web ui but that does not seem to have come through)

Reviewer 3: > since the array has no validity bitmap

Is this a general restriction, or is it just in this case there is no validity mask?

Author: Yes, this is a general restriction (at least I think so, and that's how the prototype code works). The idea so far is that Null is just one of the possible values for a run.

The is somewhat consistent with how union types work.

(if we were to allow the RLE array parent to have an additional null mask, the null count field would represent that - there seems to be a generall assumption in Arrow code that a non-zero (or array length for the NULL) null count means the presence of the standard null mask)

Reviewer 3: > this is a general restriction

We should probably document that if so, personally it seems a shame as it complicates things like nullif kernels which now have to explicitly handle the case of RLE data, whereas normally they don't need concern themselves with anything but the array data.

> union types work

Yeah, union types are a bit of a special snowflake though :laughing:

Author: it is actually documented by saying there are no buffers, but that's a bit indirect, so guess mentioning it explicitly won't hurt

Author: I submitted a PR for this here, please take a look:
[https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/33831](https://github.com/apache/arrow/pull/33831)

We discuss dictionary encoding as it relates to serialization further
below.

.. _run-length-encoded-layout:

Run-Length-encoded Layout
-------------------------

Run-Length is a data representation that represents data as sequences of the

> same a, called runs. Each run is represented as a value, and an integer

Reviewer 4: "same value"?

describing how often this value is repeated.

Any array can be run-length-encoded. A run-length encoded array has a single

> buffer holding as many 32-bit integers, as there are runs. The actual values are

Reviewer 4: nit: explicitly say signed integers?

> hold in a child array, which is just a regular array

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
held in a child array, which is just a regular array.
```

The dictionary is stored as an optional
property of an array. When a field is dictionary encoded, the values are
represented by an array of non-negative integers representing the index of the
value in the dictionary. The memory layout for a dictionary-encoded array is
the same as that of a primitive integer layout. The dictionary is handled as a

> separate columnar array with its own respective layout.

Reviewer 4: Is this related? Or was this a copy-paste thing

Author: copy-paste mistake indeed

As an example, you could have the following data: ::

    type: Float32

    [1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 1.0, null, null, 2.0]

In Run-length-encoded form, this could appear as:

::

>     * Length: 3, Null count: 2

Reviewer 4: It is a bit odd to see both logical (length) and physical (null count) values at the top level, it seems inconsistent

Author: true. one more reason I should probably change the proposal to store the logical length there

    * Accumulated run lengths buffer:

      | Bytes 0-3   | Bytes 4-7   | Bytes 8-11  | Bytes  6-63           |
      |-------------|-------------|-------------|-----------------------|

>       | 4           | 6           | 7           | unspecified (padding) |

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't these be 4, 2, 1?

Reviewer 4: How are top-level nulls interpreted? Or are they disallowed?

Author: > How are top-level nulls interpreted? Or are they disallowed?

The idea for now is that the top level only has a single buffer, holding the run length values. So it is not possible to a have a null three

> Shouldn't these be 4, 2, 1?

No they hold the accumulated length of all runs from the first to the current one. The paragraph above should have said that, sorry.

The reason for storing accumulated lengths is to make random access to a logical index possible using binary search. We can still get the length of the current run efficiently by subtracting the two adjacent values

Reviewer 4: Oops, right, you've mentioned that. Thanks!

Author: I fixed this and the other problems you commented. Thanks for looking into this!

          |--------------------------|-----------------------|
          | 00000101                 | 0 (padding)           |

        * Values buffer

          | Bytes 0-3   | Bytes 4-7   | Bytes 8-11  | Bytes  6-63           |
          |-------------|-------------|-------------|-----------------------|
          | 1.0         | unspecified | 2.0         | unspecified (padding) |

Note that a dictionary is permitted to contain duplicate values or
nulls:

::

    data VarBinary (dictionary-encoded)
       index_type: Int32
       values: [0, 1, 3, 1, 4, 2]

    dictionary
       type: VarBinary
       values: ['foo', 'bar', 'baz', 'foo', null]

The null count of such arrays is dictated only by the validity bitmap
of its indices, irrespective of any null values in the dictionary.

Since unsigned integers can be more difficult to work with in some cases
(e.g. in the JVM), we recommend preferring signed integers over unsigned
integers for representing dictionary indices. Additionally, we recommend
avoiding using 64-bit unsigned integer indices unless they are required by an
application.

We discuss dictionary encoding as it relates to serialization further

> below.

Reviewer 4: same here, was this meant to be kept?

piece of memory. Generally these are interpreted relative to the
**encapsulated message format** defined below.

> The ``size`` field of ``Buffer`` is not required to account for paddingeng-career-mgmt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``size`` field of ``Buffer`` is not required to account for padding
```
